# Till övningen

Till nästa övning ska ni inom projektgruppen försöka specificera projektet så nogrannt som möjligt. Ni ska skriva en rapport på ca. 1 sida samt förbereda en presentation baserat på detta.

Rapporten/presentationen ska innehålla:

- Vad är projektet?
  - Vad är er MVP (minimum viable product)
  - Vilka ytterligare features vill implementera om det finns tid?
- Hur fördelas arbetet?
  - Försök dela in projektet i moduler (t.ex. rendering/hasning etc.)
  - Vem/vilka ska göra vad?
  - Vad tror ni tar mest tid?
- Hur ska arbetet se ut?
  - Schemalagda möten?
  - Version control? (PR:s, rebase/merge etc.)
- Vad ska ni använda för teknologi?
  - Programemringsspråk?
  - Bibliotek?_
  - Coding guidelines?

Det absolut viktigaste är att alla kan delta under hela projektets gång.

NAMN???

## Hur fördelas arbetet

Delar
- Lagring/databas (.vcs directory)
- Workspace-hantering (staging, index, stashing)
- Commits (metadata, signaturer etc.)
- Diff creator
- IO (verkställa reset, checkout-branch etc.)
- CLI

Vem/vilka ska göra vad?

Vad tror ni tar mest tid?

## Hur ska arbetet se ut

Schemalagda möten
- ???

Version control
- PR:s med reviews
- merge vs rebase?

## Vad ska ni använda för teknologi

Rust

Bibliotek
- CLI parsing
  - clap, clap_derive
  - console/owo-colors
  - termtree
- Errors
  - thiserror
  - anyhow (kanske, isf för CLI-delen)
- Lokal databas/lagring
  - serde? (serialisering)
  - hashbrown
  - bitflags
  - ???
- Concurrency
  - tokio
- Kryptografi
  - ring (symmetric, asymmetric, signatures, random, hash)
  - blake3? (mycket snabbare hashing)
- Macros
  - syn
  - quote
  - proc-macro2
- Networking
  - ssh?
- Övrigt
  - itertools

Coding guidelines
- CI med kodformattering, linting, tester
- Modul-dokumentation
- Explicita error types

# Structure

- `vcs-common`: common types, functionality, signatures etc.
- `vcs-db`: database of commits, branches, workspaces, worktrees, remotes
- `vcs-io`: execute changes to working tree
- `vcs-diffs`: generate diffs
- `vcs-core`: core functionality: manipulate index, commits, branches
- `vcs-git`: conversion to/from git repo
- `vcs-server`: handle pushes/pulls to remote
- `vcs-porcelain`: aggregate common actions: commit, reset, etc., utilities: log etc.
- `vcs-cli`: frontend

# Commands/functionality

- `init`
- `stage <path>`
- `unstage <path>`
- `commit [<tree>]`, `<tree>` defaults to CWD
- `new-branch <name> [<ref>]`, `<ref>` defaults to the branch that CWD is checked out to
- `checkout <branch-name> [<tree>]`, `<tree>` defaults to CWD
- `copy-commit <hash> <new-parent-hash>`
- `move-branch <branch-name> <hash>`
- `rebase <branch-name> <onto-branch-name>`
- `log <branch-name>`

# Commits

Ideas:
- Commit represents the entire repo at one point
- Commits are cryptographically signed.
- Content hash is hash of the entire repo at the commit
- Author and committer are both optional
  - Author: Who wrote the code
  - Committer: Who accepted the code into the codebase
- Author signs: Version, content, parent
- Committer signs: Version, content, parent, author
- Commit hash is generated by: Version, content, parent, author, committer

```rust
struct Commit {
    version: Version,
    content_hash: Sha256,
    parent_hash: Sha256,
    changes: Changeset,
    author: Option<Signature>,
    committer: Option<Signature>,
    complete_hash: Sha256,
}

struct Changeset {
    diffs_hash: Sha256,
    diffs: RepoTree<Diff>,
}

struct Signature {
    signer_id: Sha256, // hash of User struct
    timestamp: Unixtime,
    signed_hash: Sha256, // hash of the signer id, timestamp as well as the content
}

struct User { // immutable by design
    name: String,
    email: String,
    public_key: PublicKey,
}
```

# Workspaces and worktrees

Ideas:
- A workspace contains the checked out branches/commits, any stashed items, and the index
- Stash is specific to each branch
- The worktree maps each system directory and file to a repo directory/file at a given commit
- A worktree may have zero or more children, which are separate worktrees attached to its subdirectories
- Each worktree has its own index
  - This means that you may be checked out to the same directory and same branch multiple times, but with different working dirs/indices
    - How to handle making a commit in one of the worktrees?

```rust
struct LocalRepo {
    workspaces: Map<String, Workspace>,
    current_workspace: String,
    remotes: Map<String, Remote>,
    branches: Map<String, Branch>,
}

struct Workspace {
    head: Worktree,
    stashes: Map<BranchName, Stash>,
}

struct Worktree {
    pointer: Ref,
    path: RepoPath,
    children: Map<Dirname, Worktree>,
    index: Changeset,
}

enum Ref {
    Branch(BranchName),
    Commit(CommitHash),
}
```

## Example

```
./                    TREE main:                -> main:
├── .env              IGNORED
├── .vcs/             IGNORED
├── .vcs-ignore                                 -> main:.vcs-ignore
├── Cargo.toml                                  -> main:Cargo.toml
├── docs/             TREE dev:docs/            -> dev:docs/
│   ├── mvp.md                                  -> docs:docs/mvp.md
│   └── docs.md                                 -> docs:docs/docs.md
├── docs-old/         TREE main:docs/           -> main:docs/
│   └── docs.md                                 -> main:docs/docs.md
├── README.md         TREE fix-readme:README.md -> fix-readme:README.md
└── src/                                        -> main:src/
    ├── io/           TREE feat/io:src/io/      -> feat/io:src/io/
    │   ├── reader.rs                           -> feat/io:src/io/reader.rs
    │   └── writer.rs                           -> feat/io:src/io/writer.rs
    ├── io.rs         TREE feat/io:src/io.rs    -> feat/io:src/io.rs
    └── main.rs                                 -> main:src/main.rs
```

Explanation:
- Root is checked out to root at main
- `docs` is checked out to a separate docs branch
- `docs-old` is checked out to `docs` at `main` (could be useful for referencing old content while working on the `docs` branch)
- `README.md` is checked out to a separate branch
- `src/io.rs` and `src/io/` are both checked out to the same branch
- All other directories and files are checked out to their corresponding directories on `main` (inherited from root)

# Miscellaneous features

- Convert to Git repo
  - (`git --git-dir=.vcs/.git-temp --bare`)
